.\" A man page for volume_key(8).
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2009, 2010, 2011 Red Hat, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This copyrighted material is made available to anyone wishing to use,
.\" modify, copy, or redistribute it subject to the terms and conditions of the
.\" GNU General Public License v.2.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
.\" ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public License for
.\" more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with
.\" this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 51
.\" Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301, USA.
.\"
.\" Author: Miloslav Trmač <mitr@redhat.com>])
.TH volume_key 8 "Jun 2011" volume_key

.SH NAME
volume_key \- work with volume encryption secrets and escrow packets

.SH SYNOPIS

\fBvolume_key\fP [\fIOPTION\fP]... \fIOPERAND\fP...

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B volume_key
extracts "secrets" used for volume encryption
(for example keys or passphrases)
and stores them into separate encrypted "escrow packets",
uses a previously created escrow packet to restore access to a volume
(e.g. if the user forgets a passphrase),
or manipulates the information in escrow packets.

The mode of operation and operands of
.B volume_key
are determined by specifying one of the \fB\-\-save\fP, \fB\-\-restore\fP,
\fB\-\-setup\-volume\fP, \fB\-\-reencrypt\fP, 
.B -\-dump
or
.B -\-secrets
options.
See the OPTIONS sections for details.

.SH OPTIONS

In all options described below,
.I VOLUME
is a LUKS device,
not the plaintext device contained within:
.RS
.B blkid \-s TYPE
.I VOLUME
.RE
should report \fBTYPE="crypto_LUKS"\fP.

The following options determine the mode of operation and expected operands of
\fBvolume_key\fP:

.TP
\fB\-\-save\fP
Expects operands
.I VOLUME
[\fIPACKET\fP].
Open \fIVOLUME\fP.  If
.I PACKET
is provided,
load the secrets from it.
Otherwise, extract secrets from \fIVOLUME\fP,
prompting the user if necessary.
In any case, store secrets in one or more output packets.

.TP
\fB\-\-restore\fP
Expects operands
.I VOLUME
\fIPACKET\fP.
Open
.I VOLUME
and use the secrets in
.I PACKET
to make
.I VOLUME
accessible again,
prompting the user if necessary
(e.g. by letting the user enter a new passphrase).

.TP
\fB\-\-setup\-volume\fP
Expects operands
.I VOLUME PACKET
\fINAME\fP.
Open
.I VOLUME
and use the secrets in
.I PACKET
to set up
.I VOLUME
for use of the decrypted data as \fINAME\fP.

Currently
.I NAME
is a name of a dm-crypt volume,
and this operation makes the decrypted volume available as
\fB/dev/mapper/\fP\fINAME\fP.

This operation should not permanently alter
.I VOLUME
(e.g. by adding a new passphrase);
the user can of course access and modify the decrypted volume,
modifying
.I VOLUME
in the process.

.TP
\fB\-\-reencrypt\fP
Expects operand \fIPACKET\fP.
Open \fIPACKET\fP, decrypting it if necessary,
and store the information in one or more new output packets.

.TP
\fB\-\-dump\fP
Expects operand \fIPACKET\fP.
Open \fIPACKET\fP, decrypting it if necessary,
and output the contents of \fIPACKET\fP.
The secrets are not output by default.

.TP
\fB\-\-secrets\fP
Expects operand \fIPACKET\fP.
Open \fIPACKET\fP, decrypting it if necessary,
and output secrets contained in \fIPACKET\fP.

.TP
\fB\-\-help\fP
Show usage information.

.TP
\fB\-\-version\fP
Show version of \fBvolume_key\fP.

.P
The following options alter the behavior of the specified operation:

.TP
\fB\-b\fP, \fB\-\-batch\fP
Run in batch mode.
Read passwords and passphrases from standard input,
each terminated by a NUL character.
If a packet does not match a volume exactly, fail instead of prompting the user.

.TP
\fB\-d\fP, \fB\-\-nss\-dir\fP \fIDIR\fP
Use private keys in NSS database in
.I DIR
to decrypt public key-encrypted packets.

.TP
\fB\-o\fP, \fB\-\-output\fP \fIPACKET\fP
Write the default secret to \fIPACKET\fP.

Which secret is the default depends on volume format:
it should not be likely to expire,
and it should allow restoring access to the volume using \fB\-\-restore\fP.

.TP
\fB\-\-output\-data\-encryption\-key\fP \fIPACKET\fP
Write the data encryption key (the key directly used to encrypt the actual
volume data) to \fIPACKET\fP.

.TP
\fB\-\-output\-passphrase\fP \fIPACKET\fP
Write a passphrase that can be used to access the volume to \fIPACKET\fP.

.TP
\fB\-\-create\-random\-passphrase\fP \fIPACKET\fP
Generate a random alphanumeric passphrase,
add it to
.I VOLUME
(without affecting other passphrases)
and store the random passphrase into \fIPACKET\fP.

.\" --unencrypted-yes-really is intentionally not documented.

.TP
\fB\-c\fP, \fB\-\-certificate\fP \fICERT\fP
Load a certificate from the file specified by
.I CERT
and encrypt all output packets using the public key contained in the
certificate.
If this option is not specified,
all output packets are encrypted using a passphrase.

Note that
.I CERT
is a certificate file name, not a NSS certificate nickname.

.TP
\fB\-\-output\-format\fP \fIFORMAT\fP
Use
.I FORMAT
for all output packets.
.I FORMAT
can currently be one of
.B asymmetric
(use CMS to encrypt the whole packet, requires a certificate),
.B asymmetric_wrap_secret_only
(wrap only the secret, requires a certificate),
.B passphrase
(use GPG to encrypt the whole packet, requires a passphrase).
.\" cleartext is intentionally not documented.

.TP
\fB\-\-unencrypted\fP
Only dump the unencrypted parts of the packet, if any, with \fB\-\-dump\fP.
Do not require any passphrase or private key access.

.TP
\fB\-\-with\-secrets\fP
Include secrets in the output of \fB\-\-dump\fP

.SH EXIT STATUS
.B volume_key
returns with exit status 0 on success, 1 on error.

.SH NOTES
The only currently supported volume format is LUKS.

.SH EXAMPLE

Typical usage of
.B volume_key
proceeds as follows.
During system installation or soon after,
back up the default secret of a volume, and add a system-specific random
passphrase.
Encrypt both using a certificate:
.RS
.B volume_key \-\-save
.I VOLUME
.B \-c
.I CERT
.B \-o
.I PACKET_DEFAULT
.B \-\-create\-random\-passphrase
.I PACKET_PASSPHRASE
.RE
Store
.I PACKET_DEFAULT
and
.I PACKET_PASSPHRASE
outside of the computer.

If the user forgets a passphrase,
and you can access the computer,
decrypt
.I PACKET_DEFAULT
using the certificate private key
(which should never leave a secure machine):
.RS
.B volume_key \-\-reencrypt \-d
.I NSS_DB
.I PACKET_DEFAULT
.B \-o
.I PACKET_DEFAULT_PW
.RE
Then boot the computer (e.g. using a "rescue mode"),
copy
.I PACKET_DEFAULT_PW
to it,
and restore access to the volume:
.RS
.B volume_key \-\-restore
.I VOLUME PACKET_DEFAULT_PW
.RE

If the user forgets the passphrase, and you cannot access the computer,
decrypt the backup passphrase:
.RS
.B volume_key \-\-secrets
.I PACKET_PASSPHRASE
.RE
and tell the backup passphrase to the user.
(You can later generate a new backup passphrase.)

